Most brands are quietly giving up on
organic social media. The data backs it
up. 64% of marketers are cutting their
organic budgets and shifting everything
into paid ads instead. But here's what
they're missing. The brands that are
winning organically aren't posting more
content. They're playing a completely
different game. They figured out that
social media isn't a feed anymore. It's
a TV network. I'm Neil Patel and I run
one of the largest independent marketing
agencies in the world. And in this
video, I'm going to show you exactly
what this new game looks like and why
the companies that understand it
generate more revenue, acquire customers
at lower cost, and drive more referrals,
and make their paid ads work better.
Let's get into it. Chapter one.
If your organic posts aren't going at
least somewhat viral, your account is
basically invisible. There's no middle
ground anymore. You either break through
the algorithm or you don't exist. Look
at what's happening. Only 19% of
marketers are increasing their organic
social budgets. 70% are keeping them the
same and 64% nearly 2/3 are decreasing
their investment in organic content.
Why? Because they've accepted the
reality that organic reach is dead for
most brands. But here's what makes this
insane. People are spending more time on
social media than ever. Tik Tok 35 hours
a month. Facebook 29 hours. YouTube 28
hours. The attention is there, the
audience is there, they're just not
seeing your content. So, brands are
doing what they think is their only
option. They're pouring every dollar
into paid ads. And the data backs this
up. Look at Instagram, 46% of marketers
increase their ad spend in 2026. Tik
Tok, 57% increase. YouTube, 53%. Social
ad spend is skyrocketing because brands
know the attention is on these
platforms. They just don't know how to
earn it organically anymore. And here's
why they give up on organic. When you
look at the ROI confidence by channel,
organic social media is one of the least
confident channels for marketers. Most
of them have no idea if it's even
working. They've made the calculation,
if I can't measure organic ROI and I
can't get the reach, I'll just buy the
reach with ads. But here's the problem
with that strategy. Ads are getting more
expensive every single year. And if
you're only relying on paid, you're in a
race to the bottom where customer
acquisition costs keep climbing and your
margins keep shrinking. Google. It's the
most profitable company in the world,
doing over $115 billion in profit.
Right? If that doesn't help convince
you, then I don't know what will.
Meanwhile, the brands that are winning
organically, they've cracked something
that most people are missing. Because if
you give up on organic social, you're
locking yourself into a world where
you're 100% dependent on ads to stay
visible. That means you'll never own
your audience. You'll never build a
note, and your costs will go up. The
brands that figure out how to win
organically will dominate their
categories because they'll have lower
acquisition costs, higher lifetime
value, and a loyal audience that
actually cares about what they have to
say. Now, if you want my company to help
you with your social media marketing,
check us out at NP Digital, where we
help everyone from small businesses to
large enterprise publicly traded
companies dominate social media in
today's world, both from organic and
paid perspective. Chapter two.
The way brands used to win on social
media, posting pretty product photos,
running giveaways, hoping for engagement
is over. Social media evolved. Your
strategy didn't. Look at this timeline.
In the 1950s, brands controlled
messaging through TV, one-way
communication. In the 2000s, social
media created two-way interaction. By
2012, influencers became the middleman
between brands and audiences. Then in
2020, we hit the community era. fan-led
content, user generated posts, organic
movements. But now we're entering into a
co-creation era, shared ownership,
brands that build with their audiences,
not at them. And this is a shift most
brands are missing. They're still
treating social media like a billboard,
post an image, write a caption, hope
someone likes it, maybe run a giveaway
to boost engagement. But that's not how
attention works anymore. Here's the
reality. 94.4%
of purchase journeys are multiple touch
points. No one sees one post and buys.
They see you on search. They see you on
social. They might visit your store or
website. They check your reviews. They
browse marketplaces. People are
constantly browsing, constantly
evaluating, constantly switching between
platforms. And if you're only showing up
in one place, one time with one message,
you're invisible. And here's what makes
this even harder. People are emotionally
exhausted. Anxiety is up. Worrying is
up. Feeling tired is way up. People are
overwhelmed by the sheer volume of
content being thrown at them every
single day, which means your cute
product post isn't cutting through, and
it's probably only cute to you. Your
motivational quote graphic isn't moving
the needle. Your behind-the-scenes photo
isn't building the business. In fact,
59% of people have deleted or ignored an
important message because they thought
it was an ad. Your own customers are
ignoring you because your content looks
like marketing. The old playbook, post
and pray, boost with ads, hope for
variety. It doesn't work because the
platforms change, the audience change,
and attention became the scarcest
resource on the internet. If you keep
playing the old game, you keep losing.
Chapter 3.
The brands that are still winning
organically have stopped thinking like
social media managers. They started
thinking like TV networks. You're not
running a social media account. You're
running a TV network. Here's what that
means. In the old era, brands had one
account. They posted everything on that
one account. Products, behind the
scenes, cultures, memes, educational
content, promotional stuff. And the
problem with that approach is that it
confuses the algorithm and it confuses
the audience. The algorithm doesn't know
what your account is about. So, it
doesn't know who to show your content
to. And your audience doesn't know what
to expect from you. So, they don't build
a habit of watching. The brands winning
attention today treat social media like
NBC or ABC treats TV programming. They
don't put every type of content on one
channel. They create shows. This could
even mean each show gets its own channel
instead of being published on their main
brand account. Emmy Eats, a food content
brand, launch a separate Tik Tok and
Instagram account called Ramen on the
Street. That's it. One format, one
concept. Every episode, someone sits
down with a stranger, shares a bowl of
ramen, and has a conversation about
life. That account generated 5 to 15
million views per month across the
platform, and it all funnels back to the
main Emmy Eats brand. Built Rewards, a
fintech loyalty platform for renters,
launched Roomies, a mockumentary style
sitcom about a young woman navigating
life with chaotic roommates in New York.
One format, one cast, millions of views.
Individual episodes hit 500,000 plus
views, and the show built 150,000
organic followers across Tik Tok and
Instagram. The Cheese Store of Beverly
Hills built a social presence like an
episodic show. One series centers on
helping customers find the perfect
cheese. Another captures first
reactions, bold opinions, and in the-
moment tastings behind the counter. The
result isn't just views. People now
travel from all around the world to
visit the shop in person, turning
content into real foot traffic and
customers. Here's the key. These aren't
one-off viral stunts. They're renewable,
repeatable formats designed to run like
TV shows week after week, episode after
episode. And it works because people are
creatures of habits. Look at where daily
usage is. Instagram, YouTube, Facebook,
the platforms people open every single
day are the ones where they build
habits. and habits are built through
reoccurring formats. When someone sees
your show pop up on their feed, they're
instantly recognizing the format, their
setting, the characters, they know what
they're getting, and they watch. You
need to stop treating your social media
account like a random content dump and
start treating it like a production
studio. Pick one format that works, turn
it into a show, run that show
consistently, and when it works, spin it
into its own dedicated account. That's
how you build a network. Chapter four.
A social first show isn't just posting
the same type of content. There's a
structure to it, and if you miss any
piece, it won't work. Great social shows
are built on reoccurring elements that
form habits. Here's a framework. Element
one, reoccurring format. Every episode
feels familiar. Even though the content
changes, the format stays consistent.
The moments don't. Element two,
reoccurring theme. What's the central
idea connecting all the stories? For
ramen on the street, it's the connection
over food. For Cava's Bullmates, it's
dating through food. The theme is the
thread. Element three, reoccurring
characters. People need to recognize
who's in the show. This could be the
host. This could be the reoccurring
personalities, but there needs to be a
face people trust and expect. Element
four, recurring set. This is the biggest
thing people miss. You need a location
you can film repeatably without setup. A
coffee shop counter, a park bench, a
studio desk, a car. If you can't film
your show on demand because you need to
book locations, coordinate logistics, or
wait for the right conditions, you don't
have a scalable show. For example,
Brooklyn Coffee Shop has over 200,000
followers on Instagram. Every single
episode follows the same exact
structure. The set is a counter at
Brooklyn's Coffee Shop. The characters
are two baristas with distinct
personalities. The changing element is a
customer who walks in. The format is a
1.5 to 2 minute sitcom style skit. And
the hook pattern, either the customer
walks in or their braces are doing an
action as customers enter. You know it's
a Brooklyn coffee shop video within 3
seconds. That's the power of reoccurring
elements. If you want to build a show
that people actually watch, you need to
make it recognizable. The second someone
sees your content, they should know it's
yours and should know what value they're
about to get. Recurring formats,
recurring theme, recurring characters,
recurring set. That's the formula. Even
with my own YouTube show, if you watch
the first 20 seconds or 10 seconds, you
know what to expect. And if you need
help with this, check out our ad agency
at NP Digital, where we help companies
with this. Chapter 5.
Organic social isn't separate from your
paid strategy. It's what makes your paid
strategy actually work. If you win
organically, your ads become a lot more
effective. Here's why. When you build an
organic audience that actually knows
you, trusts you, and engages with your
content, you're not starting from zero
every time you run an ad. Remember this,
94.4% of purchases or multi-touch
points. People need to see you multiple
times across multiple platforms before
they buy. If someone sees your organic
content on Tik Tok, then sees your ad on
Instagram, then Google's your brand and
finds your YouTube channel, they're not
seeing three random brands. They're
seeing you everywhere. And that
repetition builds trust faster than any
single ad campaign ever could. But if
you're only running ads and have zero
organic presence, every impression is
cold. Every click is expensive. Every
conversion requires you to build trust
from scratch. Organic content warms the
audience. Ads convert the warm audience.
The brands that understand this use
organic social as a topfunnel and paid
ads as an acceler. Let's say you run a
supplement brand. Instead of posting
random tips, you launch a reoccurring
show filmed inside a real gym. Every
episode follows the same format. A coach
spots everyday gym goers, fixes one
common mistake, and rebuilds the
movement around a specific painoint. A
bad form, plateaus, joint pain, and
wasted workouts. Same gym, same coach,
same structure, new person every
episode. The show isn't selling
anything. It's just coaching in public
week after week. Over time, the series
pulls in hundreds of thousands of
monthly organic views. Viewers don't
just recognize the brand, they trust the
coach, the philosophy, and the outcomes.
Now, when you run ads for your
pre-workout, you're not pitching
strangers. You're reaching people who
you've already spent hours watching your
content. Learn from it, and associate
your brand with results. That's the
difference between advertising at people
and advertising to audience you've
already built. Your ad goes up, your
cost per acquisition goes down, your
conversion rate improves because the
hardest part, building trust already
happened organically. This is why the
smartest brands are increasing both.
They're not just choosing between
organic and paid. They're using organic
to build an audience and paid to scale
the conversions. If you abandon organic
social, you're making your ads more
expensive and less effective. But if you
crack organic, every dollar you spend on
ads works harder because you're not
starting from zero. You're accelerating
momentum you've already built. We're in
the co-creation era now. The brands that
share ownership with their audiences
that build with them, not at them, will
win. And the way you do that is by
creating content that people actually
want to watch. Not ads, not product
posts, real shows, real value, real
recurring formats that people build
habits around. The brands that figure
out the TV network strategy that build
shows, own formats, and create recurring
content people actually care about will
dominate the next era of social media
marketing. Everyone else will be paying
more and more for less and less reach.
Organic social isn't dead, but the old
way of doing it is. If you want to learn
more about how the best brands are using
social media and content to drive more
business, watch one of these videos